---
title: Eric Rochester — Curriculum Vitæ
layout: page
---


## Computational/Corpus Linguistics 

**Information Extraction** Identified people, places, and times in document
collections to develop timelines for legal investigations, court preparations,
and electronic document discovery. 

**Statistical Analysis** Identified shifts in topics in a corpus of documents.
Developed a natural-language database interface using rule-based grammars.
Analyzed authors' stylistics. Collaborated with other linguists, legal staff,
and subject-matter experts to develop customized electronic document discovery
solutions. 

**Computational Lexicography** Designed and implemented a computer program to
facilitate best practices in writing and maintaining dictionary pronunciations. 

**Programming** Wrote programs analyzing text and language in Python, C#, Scala,
PROLOG, and other computer languages. Used hidden Markov models, support vector
machines, neural networks, and a variety of statistical tests.

## Computer/Web Programming 

**Complete Life Cycle** Designed, implemented, and deployed an updated site for
the Linguistic Atlas Projects. This included transitioning to a RDBMS (MySQL)
and new web framework.

**Distributed Text Processing** Designed and wrote a simple Map/Reduce clone in
Erlang to distribute text processing over a small cluster of computers.
Implemented a web application in Python and Django to track the work and view
the results.

**Team Work** Collaborated with teams using a variety of tools, including SVN,
Mercurial, TRAC, and wikis.   

**Experience and Technologies** Have 10 years experience writing Python
programs for desktop applications with Tkinter and wxWidgets and for web
applications with CGI, Django, and other frameworks. Have 6 years experience
writing C# programs for desktop applications with WinForms and for libraries to
be used in a variety of contexts. Developed web sites with Python and Django,
HTML, CSS, and AJAX. 

**New Languages** Advancing skills in a variety of new languages, including F#,
OCaml, Scala, and Common Lisp.

## Technical Writing  

**New Techniques** Wrote and recorded a screencast to help users navigate a
complex process on their computers. 

**Communicating Complex Information in Computers and Lingustics** Trained
lawyers, staff, and clients on the basics of computational and corpus
linguistics. Wrote a section of a whitepaper describing computer search
techniques. Maintained API documentation for a number of software projects in
Python and C#. 

**Tools** Including wikis, DocBook, XSLT, XSLT-FO, LaTeX. Generated final
products in HTML, camera-ready PDF, Compiled Help files, and other formats. 

## Professional Experience  

_**Lunex Telecom, Lilburn, GA **_<br>
May 2009 – Present <br>
*Computer Programmer*<br>
Developed web sites for a growing telecommunications company. 

_**Text Tech and Wordnik **_<br>
November 2009 <br>
*Consultant, Computational Lexicography*<br>
Transfered and modified Text Tech's dictionary pronunciations for use by Wordnik.com. 

_**ASE Edge, Inc, Pittsburgh, PA**_<br>
January 2008 –  May 2009 <br>
*Consultant, Computational Linguistics*<br>
Maintained a .NET library for doing corpus analysis, statistics, and electronic document discovery. 

_**Ava White Tutorials**_<br>
April 2008 – September 2009 <br>
*Consultant, IT and Web Developer*<br>
Helped transition to a new ISP and coded several web sites to her design and specification. 

_**ASE Edge, Inc, Pittsburgh, PA**_<br>
May 2004 – January 2008 <br>
*Computational Linguist*<br>
Maintained a .NET library for doing corpus analysis, statistics, and electronic document discovery.

_**Oxford University Press, Oxford, England **_<br>
1999, 2003, 2005 <br>
*Consultant, Lexicography*<br>
Provided American pronunciations for the Oxford English Dictionary and wrote
programs to facilitate entering those pronunciations. 

_**Schwa **_<br>
Fall 2003 – May 2004 <br>
*Programmer, Researcher*<br>
Designed and implements a system for working with dictionary pronunciations. 

_**Linguistic Atlas Projects, University of Georgia, Athens, GA **_<br>
Spring 1998 – May 2004 <br>
*Systems Administrator, Database Administrator, Web Designer*<br>
Developed and maintained the computer servers for the Linguistic Atlas Projects. 

## Education 

### Dissertation 

**Schwa: A Dictionary Pronunciation Database System**<br>
Director: William A. Kretzschmar, Jr. <br>

Schwa implements a computer system for editing and managing dictionary
pronunciations. This system emphasizes interoperability by using standard
technologies such as XML and Unicode, and it includes an in-depth examination
of the issues involved in producing lexicographical pronunciations, both from
an historical, a technical, and a theoretical perspective. It also included
complete documentation for the software described.

**University of Georgia, Athens, GA **<br>
1995–2004, Ph.D., English

**Southern Adventist University, Collegedale, TN **<br>
1988–1993, B.A., English; minor, sociology

## Professional Organizations 

 * Association for Computers in the Humanities 
 * Association for Computational Linguistics 
 * MLA 
 * Publications and Papers 

## Selected Presentations 

“New Tools for Analyzing Texts.” Language and Literature 10.2 (2001): 187–91. 

## Selected Conference Papers 

“Designing Linguistic Data Web Sites.” New Ways of Analyzing Variation (in
English and other languages) (NWAVE), Athens, Georgia, October 1998. 

“Intuitive Interfaces for the Retrieval of Linguistic Data” (with William A.
Kretzschmar, Jr.). The Association for Literary and Linguistic Computing and
the Association for Computers and the Humanities (ALLC/ACH), Debrecen, Hungary,
July 1998. 
