---
title: Writing Portfolio
layout: page
---

# Web Pages/Articles

These are articles I did for <a href="http://www.sanma.org/">SANMA</a> (a
non-profit specializing in helping alleviate child labor, poverty, and
illiteracy in south Asia).

> ## Illiteracy and Child Labor
> 
> When Baidu was twelve, his father died. From that point on, his childhood was
> over, and he had to provide for his mother. So he went to work in a local
> cotton factory. The work was tiring, and some jobs were dangerous. He spent
> all day breathing in cotton lint, which made him ill. But he had to care for
> his mother, so he went anyway.
> 
> Baidu isn't alone. UNICEF reports that 13 million children in South Asia and
> 10 million in East Asia and the Pacific (excluding China) work. Most have to
> work, because their parents' cannot put food on the table, so their income is
> crucial to their families' survival.

<p class="right"><a href="http://docs.google.com/Doc?id=dgfsqh33_2g6hffwdk">
More »
</a></p>

> ## Farm India
> 
> Naik owns a two-acre farm. He received it from his father, who received it
> from his father.
> 
> But now the fields lie fallow. Naik knows how to cultivate it, but he can’t.
> He cannot afford the oxen he needs to plow it. And because he cannot farm, he
> cannot make a living.

<p class="right"><a href="http://docs.google.com/Doc?id=dgfsqh33_2g6hffwdk">
More »
</a></p>

This is a short definition of lexicography I wrote for Text Tech.

> ## A Definition of Lexicography
> 
> Lexicography refers to the processes involved in the determination of word
> meaning and the construction of dictionaries, including but not limited to
> the following: designing domain specific guidelines for dictionary
> construction; research and gathering of old and new words and the associated
> quotations, etymologies and pronunciations; researching and writing of
> definitions; researching word usage; text encoding and formatting for storage
> and publication. Although dictionaries are familiar references, the work
> involved in producing a reliable dictionary is quite specialized. It requires
> a keen understanding of linguistics, dialectal variation, semantics, and word
> usage patterns. At TLTG we have expertise in these fields. As well, we have
> access to the latest research in pronunciations and maintain a database of
> over 100,000 current word pronunciations in both American and British English
> variations. We also have access to an extensive collection of texts for the
> analysis of word meaning, and have developed programs for assisting the
> lexicographer with research, data storage, and data conversion. With these
> resources, and the fact that we focus on a few words at a time, we can
> quickly go beyond the information provided by most dictionaries. That is,
> while they list what a word could mean at the time the dictionaries were
> compiled, we are able to rapidly determine what a word means right now, based
> on the current usage.

# Whitepapers

Here is part of a whitepaper I helped a company that does legal electronic
discovery write.

> ## Addendum D - Fundamental Differences Between Search Engines and Linguistic Evaluations
> 
> The proprietary linguistic evaluation engine has several fundamental
> differences when compared to traditionally search engines, whether on the
> Internet or otherwise. In many ways, this compares apples to oranges:
> although there are apparent similarities, they perform radically different
> functions.  Following is a brief comparison to highlight the power of the
> linguistic evaluation engine, as opposed to the traditional search engine.

<p class="right"><a
href="http://docs.google.com/Doc?id=dgfsqh33_0fbw44wds">Click here for a longer
excerpt »</a></p>

# Brochure

This is an excerpt from a brochure I wrote for <a
href="http://www.sanma.org/">SANMA</a> describing some of their special
projects.

> ## Agricultural Literacy
> 
> Although child laborers’ incomes are necessary to their families, they often
> make very little, and a simple, small investment in their financial future
> can free the children to pursue an education and become literate.

<p class="right"><a href="http://docs.google.com/Doc?id=dgfsqh33_4ckpdrshn">
More »
</a></p>

# Catalog

These samples are from an online catalog copy I wrote for <a
href="http://www.sanma.org/">SANMA</a>. Each contained a short description and
a slightly longer detail view.

> ## Infant Care
> 
> Cover: Diarrhea kills 1,600 children every day. Your gift trains a mother in
> life-saving infant care.  Detail: Diarrhea kills 1,600 children every day. A
> simple mixture of salt, sugar, and water could save the lives of many of
> these children, if their mothers only knew it. When living in poverty, a
> little knowledge can make the difference between life and death. Your small
> gift would help educate a mother on how best to care for her child.
> 
> ## Farming Animals
> 
> Cover: Your gift purchases a pair of oxen, nearly doubling a farmer’s
> production and income.  Details: In the United States, it is difficult to
> imagine a farmer without a tractor, yet many in south Asia do not even have
> livestock to help them till their fields. A pair of bulls is a tremendous
> asset that nearly doubles a farmer’s production and income.

